[phone ringing]
[clanking]
May I help you?
[chuckles] Yes. Thank you.
I need some replacement electrical tape.
Okay. You bring me the empty
and I'll get you a new roll.
Empty what?
The cardboard core that's left
when you run out of tape.
What? Why?
That's the way we do it.
I can't give you a new one
until we get the old.
Are you kidding me?
No.
[mutters] Whatever, Dennis.
[theme music playing]
[disco song playing]
[over PA] This is your captain speaking.
New York City to the Bay Area...
Just, hey, do me a favor.
Don't mention this to me ever again.
-I'm going to.
-It's the insanest idea I've ever heard.
-I'm going to, Bill.
-We have a job to do.
-We are here to teach.
-Chino, California Medical,
California Men's Colony,
Norco, Soledad, San Quentin--
If you'd said to me, "I want to become
a Beach Boy, take up surfing,
-sit around smoking the vibes."
-Folsom.
Or, "I want to make it in the movies.
Gonna get me a walk-up in West Hollywood
and a Pekingese."
Manson is 30 miles away in Vacaville.
A hop, skip, and a jump.
-You really wanna meet Charlie Manson?
-Why not?
-[flight attendant] Sir.
-Swing by and say hi.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Nobody wants to hear
about that crazy motherfucker.
You know this.
[woman over PA] Welcome to San Francisco.
Please remain seated...
Besides, when are you gonna find time
for these fireside chats, Holden?
I'll figure it out.
[Tench] Nobody can talk to Manson.
Tom Snyder's been trying to interview him
for years.
We're the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
What if his civil rights
are being violated?
Please just get in the car.
[Tench] In California every year,
35 percent of murders go unsolved.
That's more unsolved murders
than in any other state.
It's partly due to geography.
In the woods, in the mountains,
-ravines, hiking trails--
-You can't get to Manson,
-even if you're a fed.
-[sighs]
CMF treats him like a fucking unicorn.
No one needs to think about psychology
more than the people in Santa Cruz.
-In a homicide situation...
-If you go to Vacaville, meet Ed Kemper.
-[Tench] What happened that triggered him?
-Give me that name again.
Kemper. Ed Kemper.
They call him the "Coed Killer."
[Tench] What about when even the killer
doesn't know why he behaved as he did?
You can't miss the guy.
He's like six foot nine, 285 pounds.
-Whoa. King-size.
-Super king.
-[Tench] Violent murder used to be...
-Killed a bunch of coeds in Santa Cruz.
Six teenage girls, chops their heads off,
has sexual intercourse with the corpses.
-Oh...
-Kills his mom with a claw hammer,
has sexual intercourse with her head.
-Bullshit.
-In her mouth.
-No.
-Yeah.
[Tench] When strangers murder strangers
for no apparent reason...
He was in a mental institution
right up until then too.
He's a total whack job. He was murdering
his grandparents at the age of 15,
but then he manages to convince everyone
that he's completely rehabilitated.
Oh, my God.
In many of these crimes,
the motives are not just obscure...
Jim Conor knew him real well.
I'll introduce you.
-Really?
-Yeah.
-...borderline unfathomable.
-Thank you.
[Conor] Used to call him Big Ed.
Everybody here knew him.
-Was he an informant?
-No, but he was smart. He was funny.
He used to watch all the cop shows on TV.
Crazy about Wambaugh and Police Story.
[Molina] He wanted to be CHP,
but it didn't work out.
He would joke that they could conceal
his psychiatric record
but not his fat ass.
[laughs] Stupid shit like that.
Guys like him
always want to be in uniform.
Losers. Losers are drawn to authority.
Nobody wants to admit it,
but losers are useful.
-Why?
-[Conor] They're nosy.
They know what everybody else is up to.
And they're resentful, a lot of 'em.
-They always got a raw deal.
-Ed was a busybody.
And this was before you knew
about the killings?
Oh, we knew about 'em,
just hadn't connected them with him.
-He kept asking about them, though.
-And you didn't suspect him?
[Conor] What?
"What?" You liked the guy.
-Let's say he was a friendly nuisance.
-Oh, come on.
-He was hard not to like.
-So you were the arresting officer?
In the end,
he lit out to Pueblo, Colorado,
expecting there to be
some kind of manhunt.
When nobody came, he got sick of waiting
and decided to turn himself in.
Called from a pay phone. Confessed!
We thought he was bullshitting.
I drove him all the way back.
He wouldn't stop yakking.
Going into forensic detail.
I thought I hit the jackpot.
After a few hours,
I'm like, "Oh, God, please. Enough!"
You think Kemper would talk to us?
Try stopping him.
Who's "us," kemosabe?
[reporter] David Berkowitz, 24.
Spent his days sorting letters
at the post office so he could...
What?
Really, what are you expecting to learn?
A killer who can't stop talking?
It's a gift.
A gift, huh?
He made a severed head
perform fellatio on him.
His third victim
was a 15-year-old child, Holden.
You don't want to talk?
So, basically, you just got me out here
to carry your slide projector?
To help with the workload, yeah.
The work we're sanctioned to do.
Kemper doesn't interest you
or is beneath you somehow?
A little of both.
-This is the man...
-[Holden] Think the tie's too much?
What about the suit?
Anybody finds out you're a fed,
there'll be a riot.
Shepard finds out
you've been interviewing the Coed Killer
as a side project, he'll flip his shit.
It's easier to ask forgiveness
than permission.
[sighs] Okay.
If you're gonna go in,
you need to go in stone goddamn cold,
take him by surprise,
get the fuck out as quick as possible.
Good advice.
Straight in there, don't phone,
don't give them a chance to ask around.
I'm a buddy of Jim Conor's.
"Jim Conor reached out," you bet.
"He sends his regards."
"I stopped by the Jury Room for a drink."
"The guys all say..." Blah, blah, blah.
-"Can I call you Big Ed?"
-I wouldn't mention the killings.
You're not there
because he's a necrophile degenerate.
You're there because he's... fascinating.
How do I not mention the killings?
Just take it slow.
-What are you doing?
-Just in case.
They're not gonna let you in
with a sidearm.
The guy is six foot nine,
weighs 300 pounds.
-That's right.
-So what's he gonna do?
He's gonna take the fucking thing away,
kill you with it,
and then have sex with your face.
[metal clanking]
Hold it, guys.
-You're clear.
-[Holden] I don't want to spoil your fun.
-I'm good. Nine is fine.
-[buzzer sounds]
You could come. Take notes.
You take notes,
I'll help you write 'em up.
You're really gonna go golfing
while I glean profound insights
from the Coed Killer?
-It's my day off.
-You're gonna be sorry.
No. You're gonna be sorry, Holden,
when he decides you're using him
and there's nothing in it for good old Ed.
-I think there is.
-What?
He's going to be part of something
instead of rotting inside a cell.
Part of what? We're not even here.
[bell rings]
All right.
[man] I must respectfully ask
for your badge and firearm.
Yes, sir.
In addition,
I have some paperwork for you to sign.
A disclaimer that states in the event
of your death, or if you're taken hostage,
attacked, assaulted, or otherwise abused
within the correctional facility,
the United States government
forswears any and all liability.
Oh. [clicks tongue] Okay.
[buzzer sounds]
[indistinct chatter, shouting]
[man] Kiss my ass!
[man 2] Hey, boy,
bring that shit over here!
[man 3] Bitch!
[shouting, chatter continues]
[man screaming]
[indistinct chatter]
[keys jangle]
Can we unlock the--
No, those stay on. They're regulation.
I think that's gonna be
a little awkward.
You're FBI.
-Okay. You're all set.
-Thanks, Jim.
-[Jim] I'll see ya later.
-Later.
[door locks]
Holden, right?
-Edward.
-Edmund.
-Oh, I'm sorry. I assumed that it was--
-Are you tired?
How could you tell?
It's a beautiful drive, but it's long.
Edmund was my mom's idea,
so you can call me Ed.
Sure thing.
So how can I help?
Okay. Um...
I'm an instructor working out of
the Behavioral Science Unit at Quantico,
and I had this idea--
Have you had breakfast?
Can I get you something?
You want a sandwich?
-No, I'm okay.
-What kind of sandwich you like?
-Um... I'm good.
-You want an egg salad sandwich?
-I'm fine. Really.
-I'll get us an egg salad sandwich.
I can get almost anything you want
from the canteen.
Okay.
-Do you have tuna?
-Oh, the egg salad's better.
-Hey, Jim?
-[Jim] Yeah, Ed?
[Ed] Have you seen Mitch this morning?
You think you can find him for me?
[Holden clears throat]
-Good, huh?
-Mmm!
These guys are great.
I've been here five years.
We just clicked right off the bat.
You like the guards?
Well, they like me. I'm polite.
You know, I heard that you used to drink
at the Jury Room.
You mean in Santa Cruz?
Yeah, those are good guys.
I applied to California Highway Patrol.
My mom spoke to the cops
to get my psychiatric record expunged.
Turns out my record didn't bother them
at all, I was just too tall.
Too tall? [laughs]
I've heard of being too short, but...
What?
Nothing. It just seems...
You think they lied to me?
No.
Well, cops like me
because they can talk to me...
more than they can talk
to their own wives, some of them.
Really? What do you talk about?
You know, books, movies.
I watch all the cop shows on TV.
Do you know, uh...
Joseph Wambaugh, Police Story?
You ever watch that?
-[laughs] Huge fan.
-Oh.
I got a lot of my insights right there.
Really?
What kind of insights?
Well, so, for example, with cops,
I would not allow myself
to walk into a trap
because I knew exactly how their minds
worked from watching Wambaugh.
What kind of trap are you talking about?
The classic is talking too much
about the crimes.
Over-interest.
You have to remain casual.
They tried everything to trick me.
I'm too savvy.
I don't fucking talk, period.
Really? That's interesting.
So...
you had this idea?
Yes. Uh, yes.
It's kind of, uh...
Well, it's more of a research thing.
Research.
Just a series of interviews,
chatting with...
individuals not unlike yourself.
We're just talking?
I don't get to go someplace,
do a bunch of tests?
No. Yeah, no tests. Just right here.
Why?
Well, because I believe
it could be useful.
Talking about what?
Well, I don't know.
Your...
behavior, I guess.
If you want to, that is.
We don't have to talk about
anything at all if you don't want to.
Why are you so tense?
[Holden] Hm?
You're tense, right now.
No, I'm not tense.
Well, I'll be honest,
I don't get many visitors.
When I do, you think
they want to talk about this shit?
Fuck no. It's like if you worked
at a slaughterhouse with livestock,
real conversation stopper.
Did you?
No, I'm just saying...
People who hunt other people
for a vocation,
all we want to talk about
is what it's like.
The shit that went down.
The entire fucked-upness of it.
Right, sure.
It's not easy.
Butchering people is hard work.
Physically and mentally.
I don't think people realize.
You need to vent.
What are you writing down?
Oh, I just think it's an interesting
choice of words, "vocation."
Well, what would you call it?
A hobby? I'd say it's more than that.
Look at the consequences.
The stakes are very high.
Is this helping?
Are you getting what you came for?
-I think.
-Good.
Can I-- Could I just ask you something?
Do you believe that prison can help you?
Are you kidding?
You think you shouldn't be in prison?
I think it's shutting the barn door
after the horse has bolted, somewhat.
What do you think
the state should do with you instead?
Well, Holden,
a lobotomy's not out of the question.
Lobotomy?
Like Frances Farmer.
-You remember Frances Farmer?
-No.
I loved Frances Farmer.
She was an actress.
They lobotomized her in the '50s.
She was very smart and intense...
very misunderstood. She was a lot like me.
You don't think you could benefit
from psychiatry?
I already did all that in the institution.
It didn't take.
For me, I think surgery
might give me the best chance.
And if surgery doesn't... take,
in this modern society, what do we do
with the Ed Kempers of the world?
Well, isn't that your department?
From your perspective.
Death by torture?
[Ed] So what are you not telling me?
Why do you keep looking at me like that?
-Like what?
-Funny.
You keep looking at me
like I'm a specimen.
[sighs] Well, to be honest...
It's just you seem like a nice,
ordinary...
It's difficult for me to square you
with what you're in prison for.
Oh.
Well, sure.
I was a regular guy most of my life,
with a nice home, nice suburb.
I had pets, I went to a good school.
I was a thoughtful, educated,
well brought up young person.
There's no question about it.
But...
at the same time...
I was living a vile, depraved,
entirely parallel other life
filled with debased violence and mayhem,
and fear, and death.
Well...
it certainly seems to me
like you had your own unusual...
An unusual MO. Oh, sure.
Well, I was gonna say...
signature.
An oeuvre, if you will.
You could study it.
You can spell oeuvre, can't you, Holden?
You know, there's a lot more like me.
Do you think so?
People that kill in sequence like you did?
-Sequence?
-One right after another.
At regular intervals.
I've just been calling them...
"sequence killers"...
if you will.
-How many would you say?
-Well...
it would be a guess,
but I'd say right now...
North America, more than 35.
Thirty-five?
But you're never gonna find them
if they don't want you to. Not even close.
That can't be right.
Well, Holden, I'm not an expert.
I'm not an authority.
I'm just
an extremely accomplished murderer
who spent my adult life
successfully evading capture...
until I gave myself up
because I despaired of ever being caught.
So take it or leave it.
What do you want from me?
[sighs]
I have no idea.
His oeuvre?
What the fuck? He's Stanley Kubrick?
He was extremely talkative.
He likes talking to cops.
He's lonely. He could do it all day.
He's not some frenzied thrill killer,
Bill.
I think we need to face that.
He chopped off women's heads
and had sex with their corpses.
If that's not frenzied,
I don't know what is.
He is so articulate.
He's meticulous and highly intelligent.
Yeah, he meticulously chose small, young,
female prey who couldn't fight back.
Animal cunning.
He's self-aware and objective.
Isn't that highly unusual?
He's saying everything you want to hear,
just like he did with the shrinks
in the institution.
He knew just enough to talk his way out,
then went hunting.
-Don't be stupid about this.
-What makes you so sure I'm being stupid?
I know these fuckers.
It's only a matter of time
before he hits you up for privileges.
-Next, he's complaining to the warden--
-Come with me next weekend.
-See for yourself.
-No, I'm not gonna do that.
You're just going to play golf?
It helps me think clearly.
You might want to try it.
-[panting] Oh, yeah. Up a little.
-[Holden] Uh-huh.
-Over a little. Left.
-My left or your left?
My left.
[panting]
This okay?
It's fine. What's wrong?
-You want a break?
-Why would I want a break?
-That's not how it works.
-All right.
You want me to throw in something?
Play with your nipples?
-Why?
-Move it along.
-You're doing great. Just stop stopping.
-Okay.
[moaning]
He knows more about lust murder
than the whole
FBI Behavioral Science Unit.
-We should put him on the payroll.
-Would the FBI ever do that?
Doubtful.
Everyone's freaked out
that Berkowitz might sell his life story.
New York State is moving
to make that sort of thing illegal.
It'd be awful
for the families of the victims.
-[waitress] What can I get you?
-Hi.
Uh, can I get two eggs over medium,
home-fried potatoes,
and wheat toast with grape jelly?
-And for you?
-Uh...
-I'll just have an Ed salad sandwich--
-A what?
-An egg salad sandwich. Thank you.
-Holden, you don't even like egg salad.
-[waitress] Thank you.
-Right. Um...
I'll just have a Denver omelet.
You've got mention-itis.
You cannot stop mentioning him.
Think of how much we can learn
from a guy like Kemper.
He called it a vocation.
-Killing women?
-Yeah.
Jesus. How do you wrap your mind
around that?
Couldn't attract them.
Didn't have the social skills.
That would describe a lot of guys.
Why does he hate women?
I should ask.
-But not outright.
-No?
He sounds like the kind of person
who would tell you what you wanna hear.
-You have to disarm him first.
-You mean, like...
-What?
-Ask him questions about himself.
Lean into him, listen intently.
-I do that.
-Keep your arms uncrossed.
Mirror his movements.
Encourage him to talk
about the things he's excited about.
Are these feminine wiles?
Cross your legs in his direction.
-Do you really do that?
-But don't touch him.
You want him to like you,
but you don't want him to think
you're gonna fuck him.
[laughing] Look at your face.
[indistinct chatter, shouting]
[Holden] Here's the thing.
I spent five years as a brick agent
and a couple of years at the academy.
-I'm squeaky clean.
-[Ed] Oh.
[Holden] I'm Eliot Ness. I'm--
You're Melvin Purvis, G-MAN.
Exactly.
And back then, no skirt in the FBI.
-No women, just men.
-Wow.
Then I enroll in college,
and suddenly, I am Warren fucking Beatty.
-Wow.
-Everything goes.
-You take sugar?
-No.
-Cool. Milk?
-Thank you.
-You got it, man.
-Suddenly it's disco and poppers,
and fern bars.
I am up to my neck in chicks.
Pussy, pussy, pussy. I hear that.
It turns out chicks do really dig a guy
with a badge.
"Gas, grass, or ass.
Nobody rides for free."
Next thing I know, I'm with a 24-year-old
that I met in a bar.
No woman has ever been so into me
in my entire life.
Don't brag. It's unbecoming.
Oh, my God. I am so sorry.
I'm kidding.
[Holden] Man...
the things she comes up with in the sack.
You gotta love that young pussy.
I do. I really fucking do.
You gotta make it with that young pussy
real quick before it turns into Mom.
Yeah.
So you were a virgin up until then,
that's what you're saying?
-No, not at all.
-Oh, you go over like you're a virgin.
-What?
-What's wrong with that?
I was a virgin for years.
Oh, no, there's nothing wrong with it,
it's just I'm... not.
Uh-huh.
This new girl, she take it up the ass?
We haven't really discussed it.
Ask her.
An asshole will suck your cock right in,
literally.
It's like a hole that sucks.
[makes slurping sound] It's easy.
But when you fuck somebody in the neck,
it's entirely the opposite.
It's nothing but resistance.
It's really difficult.
Let me.
You feel this?
Feel it. It's all muscle.
Cartilaginous.
[wheezes, coughs]
Is this interesting?
-Oh, yeah.
-Because I can skip some of the detail.
No, I'm here for the detail.
A major college campus.
It's like a giant candy store,
you know what I mean.
Right.
Your, uh, your mom worked on campus
at UCSC, right?
Remind me again what she did.
-Administrative assistant.
-Right.
That's all she lived for, man,
her work and her precious coeds,
whom she mothered relentlessly.
Do you think
that she neglected you for them?
Put it this way,
she had a very violently
outspoken position on men.
She had a failed marriage with my father.
I looked a lot like him, so...
You reminded her of him.
Do you think you developed a dislike
for young women as a result?
As far as she was concerned,
I was never going to end up
with one of those girls
because I was a fuckup
and an embarrassment.
-You were a failure in her eyes.
-Look.
My mother was a decent, upstanding,
reasonable woman,
but when it came to me,
she had nothing but contempt,
disappointment, and disdain.
That must've been awful.
Well, here's the thing.
I'm listening.
Women are born with this little hole
between their legs...
which every man on earth
just wants to stick something into.
And they're weaker than men,
so they learn strategies.
They deploy their minds and their sex,
and they intuitively learn to humiliate.
Did your mother humiliate you?
Ed?
[buzzer sounds]
[Holden] Lust murder doesn't cut it.
He did not stab, and rape, and decapitate
Mom because he was aroused.
He was conditioned to do it.
-Did he say that?
-As good as.
It's schtick.
He learned the vernacular
in the institution.
-He's sophisticated enough to use it.
-No, that's not my instinct.
Is it your instinct he was choosing words
carefully or did he just spew it out?
Very carefully.
He's got you pegged. He's telling you
what he's guessed you want to hear.
-But why would I want to hear that?
-Because you're you.
You told him
about your university education,
and your sassy girlfriend,
and your sensitive character,
and he tailored his bullshit to fit.
-Why did you tell him that stuff?
-To loosen him up.
Why do you feel the need
to tell him about your girlfriend?
Just to get him talking.
Holden, he's had seven years
in a correctional facility.
He's been practicing. Don't encourage him.
-I was trying to disarm him.
-You're a federal agent.
Don't give him anything.
He's your subject. Be objective.
-I've gotta trust my instincts on this.
-There's that word again.
So in Fairfield, Iowa
you were in the Dark Ages,
and now suddenly, you have
all these unimpeachable instincts?
Well, it's been a process.
Okay, look, there's no doubt
whatever happened in there
was a profound experience for you,
but I need you to understand
that whatever you think,
there is a distinct possibility
that he's manipulating you.
[Steve Miller Band's
"Fly Like an Eagle" playing]
Ticktock, tick
Doo, doo, doo, doo
Time keeps on slippin'
Slippin', slippin'
Into the future
Time keeps on slippin'
Slippin', slippin'
Into the future
I want to fly like an eagle
To the sea
Fly like an eagle
Let my spirit carry me
I want to fly like an eagle
Till I'm free
Fly through the revolution
It's not my fault.
Time keeps on slippin'
Slippin', slippin'
Into the future
Time keeps on slippin'
Slippin', slippin'
Into the future
Time keeps on slippin'
Slippin', slippin'
Into the future
Time keeps on slippin'
Slippin', slippin'
Gentleman, I'm Detective Roy Carver.
Listen, I was a little late
for the presentation,
but that was just great.
-Well, thank you very much.
-Glad to be of service.
Listen, before you go,
I was hoping I could ask you something.
I know you're not just here to teach.
-No, we really just teach, Roy.
-Pretty much all we focus on.
I was hoping I could get you to take
a look at something a little, uh...
unusual.
Oh, sure thing.
Her name's Rosemary Gonzales,
73 years old.
Her husband died of cancer
so she sold the family farm in Chico,
moved to Sacramento
to be closer to the grandkids.
Two weeks ago, we find her beaten
within an inch of her life
in a doorway to her back porch.
She hasn't been robbed.
She's been groped and assaulted
but not penetrated,
and the little dog's throat's been cut.
Was the dog killed
because it was protecting her?
Or for some other reason?
That I don't know. But it's interesting.
Why didn't he stab her?
Didn't have the nerve?
I don't think some Latino with a shiv
got scared of a little old lady.
Why do you say that?
Why do you say "Latino" like that?
That's the neighborhood, spics and blacks.
Did she identify anybody
of that ethnicity?
No. She was hovering in and out
of a coma for the past ten days.
Now she's finally come around,
she has no recollection whatsoever.
You think it's about a little dog?
Scottish Terriers can be loud.
Their bark...
-Could be annoying.
-Listen...
we need to know exactly
how worried we need to be.
[Rosemary] My husband would've cried
to see me like this.
Me, I don't cry. I'm tough.
But he was just like a baby.
It would've destroyed
his faith in humanity.
What did I ever do?
Who would do such a thing?
I never hurt a soul.
I don't have any enemies.
I don't dress like a whore.
-I'm an old lady--
-[woman] Est bien.
[whimpers]
Let me ask you something.
Did your dog ever bite anyone?
Never.
Ever bother anyone by barking?
Any complaints from neighbors?
[Rosemary] No. He was very well-behaved.
-Who cuts the grass, Rosie?
-Who helps you take care of the yard?
I have all sorts of help. Kids mostly.
Which kids?
[Rosemary] Just local kids.
It's a very close community.
And you didn't recognize your assailant?
He wasn't familiar?
I just don't remember.
Do you have kids?
Two daughters.
[Tench] Married?
The eldest is divorced. Dios mo.
The younger I don't see that often.
Can you remember anything else?
Was he big, little?
Do you remember any moles, scars,
tattoos, distinctive marks?
I remember moonlight.
And...
I do remember a smell.
What kind of smell?
[Rosemary] I don't know, he just...
-He stank.
-[Tench] Like what?
Grease or gasoline, fertilizer?
[Rosemary] Like a bum.
Like somebody who needed to wash.
Seventeen, eighteen-year-old
high school kid,
low self-esteem, hates authority,
doesn't get along well with his parents.
What, just some punk?
Gets into a fight
with his old man one night,
maybe he gets a hold of a bottle of liquor
and comes across the house,
recognizes the place because he cut
the grass there when he was younger.
-Some neighborhood kid?
-[Holden] He goes inside.
She doesn't recognize him,
thinks he's broken in, and starts yelling.
The fight gets physical.
He's drunk, he beats the shit out of her.
He knifes the dog
because the dog is yapping its head off.
And then he runs.
Are you guys serious? A teenager?
He has bad hygiene.
Doesn't bathe
because bathing is what his parents want.
Look, we got a lot of kids like that
around here.
But what kind of degenerate
carves up a little dog?
Maybe the kid saw the dog in the yard,
decided to conduct a moonlight experiment
with his Bowie knife, gets interrupted.
A careful, considerate old lady
would bring her dog in at night.
She went outside with the dog
because she heard something.
[Carver] Listen.
It was a harvest moon.
We have been tossing the idea around
that maybe it's one of these, uh...
you know, satanic deals.
You know, like maybe the dog is some kind
of ritual sacrifice or something.
[inhales sharply]
Check.
You need to squeeze
the neighborhood kids.
One of them knows something.
We had a kid like that,
brought him in for questioning twice.
Bring him in again.
We're gonna get pushback
from the family.
His aunt works for the county.
-Then make it formal.
-I'm probably gonna need a warrant.
We might be able to help you with that.
Fuck!
Nancy's gonna kill me.
We can't get a flight till Sunday.
-Maybe this kid's like Kemper.
-We have to get a room.
I can take care of the room.
We can turn this into an opportunity.
-It could help with the Gonzales case.
-I can't believe I'm stuck with you.
-We can talk to Kemper.
-No!
-I'm gonna play golf.
-Come with me.
I'm not consulting with Ed Kemper.
Not to consult. Just background.
When did his behavior escalate?
You can't stay away
from that motherfucker, can you?
No, please. Don't say "motherfucker."
You know that he'll respond
to your seniority.
-You could really smoke him out.
-No, not now.
We're stuck here all weekend.
What else are you gonna do?
I said forget about it, man.
[exhales]
[buzzer sounds]
So, you're the big boss, right?
Well, I established
the Behavioral Science Unit years ago,
but Holden's come in
with a lot of new ideas.
So Holden's
the intrepid rookie investigator?
Bill taught me everything I know
about criminal behavior.
Is that right?
Well, let me ask you something, Bill.
What do you think
about Joseph Wambaugh?
He knows Joe. Right, Bill?
Well...
Actually,
he based a lot of that stuff on Bill.
-No shit.
-Uh-huh.
[Holden] Not the, uh, stories,
but the psychological insights
and the vernacular.
Yeah.
That is fascinating.
I sure would love
to pick your brain sometime.
Well, that's another life sentence
right there.
-[chuckles]
-[Holden] Maybe you could, uh...
talk about your background
a little bit with Bill.
Maybe tell him the thing
that you told me the other day
about your mother.
My mother.
Well, you see, Bill,
even as a child,
I had kind of a rich fantasy life.
As a teenager,
I began by cutting up inanimate objects.
G.I. Joe. My sister's dolls.
Ripping their heads off,
cutting up the bodies.
Mutilating them, if you will.
You had fantasies of what, real women?
[Ed] Oh, yeah.
And my mother would yell
and scream at me, tell me I was sick.
She thought I was going to do
something hideous one day.
What did she think you were gonna do?
I guess rape my sister or something.
This is when I was ten years old.
Nice.
Not exactly The Brady Bunch.
[Tench] Why do you think she thought this?
Because she was fucking nuts.
-You didn't do anything to frighten her?
-[Ed] She frightened me.
She'd make me sleep
on a dirty old mattress in the basement.
Lock the door. Ten years old.
So then it became dogs and cats,
strangling them,
burying them in the backyard.
[Holden] Hold on. Sorry.
Just to vent.
You know what I'm saying?
Classic displacement activity.
Because it was my retreat
from the insanity of the world.
-Then, you see--
-[Holden] Sorry. Wait a minute.
Sorry, guys.
Is that why your mother sent you away?
In the end,
I ran away to live with my father,
but he didn't want me either.
So they packed me off
to live with my grandma.
She thought I was a freak.
Is that why you shot her?
Well, they were both very controlling,
aggressive, matriarchal women.
-Matriarchal?
-[Ed] Female-centric.
Get that down. That's a big antecedent.
What happened after that?
I was put in a fucking mental institution.
I was 15.
I was 21 years old when I came out.
All those years when other kids
were having their sexual revolution,
I was locked in a room.
You remember the whole flower power,
college girls into love and peace?
Physically, I wasn't impotent,
but emotionally I was.
Because of the way I was conditioned
by Mom, right? Like you said.
-Conditioned?
-Right.
You see, Bill,
I knew a week before she died
I was gonna kill her.
She went out to a party, she got soused,
she came home alone.
I asked her how her evening went.
She just looked at me.
She said, "For seven years."
She said, "I haven't had sex with a man
because of you, my murderous son."
So I got a claw hammer
and I beat her to death.
Then I cut her head off.
And I humiliated her.
And I said, "There. Now you've had sex."
If there's one thing I know, it's this:
A mother should not scorn her own son.
If a woman humiliates her little boy,
he will become hostile, and violent,
and debased. Period.
[man over PA] Ladies and gentlemen,
we've reached our cruising altitude...
-I think we need to talk.
-Now do you see?
I need to speak to Shepard.
Tell him what's going on.
It's too early.
The longer we wait,
the worse it's gonna be.
-We'll be drowned in red tape.
-And there's a reason for that.
The FBI is a glacial bureaucracy,
but it's highly effective.
Kemper's in lockdown,
what's he gonna do?
Kemper is a gigantic blabbermouth.
He's friends with all the prison guards.
A federal agent is meeting with him,
you think that hasn't reached the warden?
A couple of months, that's all I need.
No. Because if we get censured,
we're off work two weeks minimum,
no appeal.
And you can kiss goodbye
to the Gonzales case.
They'll never catch that guy.
Did you tell a detective in Sacramento
you would intercede
with the district attorney
on behalf of the FBI?
Some DA called me and asked
why I had two agents in Sacramento.
"Two goons," his exact words.
It's a strange case.
The locals were struggling.
We were trying to figure a way forward.
What were you thinking?
At the time, we deemed this
of great urgency.
The circumstances were unusual.
Assault and battery?
Since when does the FBI consult on that?
Not even homicide.
Unless you count a dog.
Bill, the past three years
I've heard you complain
about how overworked you are
with the Road School.
I gave you your assistant,
and this is how you choose
to spend your time?
I trust you understand my position
on this.
Is there anything else
you want to tell me?
[grunts]
[siren wailing on TV]
I get back on Tuesday, if you want
to pick me up from the airport.
Sure, I'd love to.
-You should come with me sometime.
-To Detroit?
See your old stomping grounds.
Meet my mom.
-[laughs]
-[scoffs]
Okay, good to know where we're at.
-No, I would love to meet your mom.
-I said sometime.
No, actually, it's something
I would really enjoy.
I meant eventually.
I'm sure she's really, really lovely.
Actually, she's kind of a bitch,
especially when it comes
to people I'm dating.
Really?
But... I like you.
I might give you the secret
to win her over.
What might that be?
Well, Mom doesn't care what kind of music
you like, what kind of job you have,
what kind of car you drive.
Instead, she'll ask you about your mother.
It'll seem like
a perfectly innocent question,
but she'll be watching you closely.
If she thinks
you love and respect your mom,
she'll know that you'll treat her daughter
the same way.
That's actually shrewd.
...hair group.
It can't do anything about the hair...
So...
do you like your mom?
[inhales, exhales]
I do.
She's someone I really enjoy talking to.
I knew it. I knew you were a momma's boy.
You should just come with me tomorrow.
You've already passed the test.
I couldn't even if I wanted to.
Shepard doesn't want us leaving town.
Why? What's happened?
We-- Well...
I...
really fucked up.
Ooh. You grounded?
When are they gonna start
taking this whole thing seriously?
[sighs]
-Hi.
-How do you know where I live?
-Personnel gave me your address.
Let's go back to Shepard.
Tell him about Kemper,
tell him what we've been doing.
-You think he'll listen now?
-Let's make it official.
You don't want to wait
till Sacramento blows over?
No, I want to go back to Sacramento
and fix it.
If we fix it,
Shepard might give us what we want.
He's not stupid. He'll have to listen.
[Shepard]
Are you out of your fucking minds?!
You interviewed Edmund Kemper?
Not so much interviewed.
More like a conversation.
He said interesting things
that turned out to be really useful.
-What the fuck?
-I just had this idea--
I don't want to hear your idea.
I'm sick of your ideas.
It is not our job
to commiserate with these people.
It is our job to electrocute them.
How long has this been going on?
-Just when we were in Sacramento.
-The conversations with Kemper shed light
on things we've been exploring
in the unit.
There's a correlation
with what we're finding at crime scenes.
It proves that we're on track.
Proof the Federal Bureau of Investigation
is on track after all these years?
Well, golly, what a relief.
I am so pleased for us.
-We're pleased too.
-Don't smart-mouth me, Holden!
You fucked up the Gonzales situation,
pissed off the Sacramento DA,
and you've been interviewing lifers
in the state penitentiary.
Sir, the insights during these visits
may help us identify
the person responsible for the attacks
in Sacramento and prevent others.
Wrong, wrong, and wrong.
Here's what it is. Burn your notes.
Don't speak to me about this anymore.
Don't put it in any reports. You're done.
Excuse me, sir.
I truly believe there is a vein here
that needs to be mined.
Okay, kiddo.
You're looking down the barrel.
Three whole bags:
censure, suspension, transfer.
Pardon me.
Sir, permit me to speak.
I've been doing this shit for seven years.
I trained Holden because
he was transferred to my department.
He knows his criminal psychology.
He's done his homework,
worked his butt off,
and now I think he's onto something.
Onto what?
He made friends with the Coed Killer.
If this is going to work,
we need to talk to more subjects.
More? No! What's next, Charles Manson?
When's he booked for?
We were thinking June.
I think it's right.
We need to use whatever resource--
Resource, my ass!
What's the matter, bored with golf?
California jails are full
of thrill killers and lust murderers.
-And we put them there, that's our job.
-Dying and rotting on the vine.
Cry me a river, Holden.
All the wasted potential.
It is wasted potential, sir.
-We could be using these people.
-Using how?
-Their knowledge and insight.
-Of what?
-[Holden] Themselves.
-Whoselves?!
Then we know what we're talking about
when we speak to other law enforcement.
-Can you make him shut up?
-I have not been able to, sir.
How do we get ahead of crazy
if we don't know how crazy thinks?
I like you, Bill.
I don't particularly like him,
but I like you.
Okay, you may continue
with your little sideshow.
However, no one can know about it. Clear?
You will relocate yourselves
to the basement
beneath Behavioral Sciences,
reporting directly and exclusively to me.
The basement? I'm 44 years old.
You may dedicate ten hours
of your 50-hour work week to this.
If I deem any aspect of it to be
unwarranted, unnecessary, or unsavory,
I will end it. Do you both understand?
Yes.
And thank you, sir.
Thank you, sir.
[Talking Heads' "Psycho Killer" playing]
[elevator dings]
I can't seem to face up to the facts
I'm tense and nervous
And I can't relax
I can't sleep 'cause my bed's on fire
Don't touch me, I'm a real live wire
Psycho killer, qu'est-ce que c'est?
Fa-fa-fa-fa
Fa-fa-fa-fa-fa, far better
Run, run, run, run, run, run, run away
Oh-ho-ho
Psycho killer, qu'est-ce que c'est?
Fa-fa-fa-fa
Fa-fa-fa-fa-fa, far better
Run, run, run, run, run, run, run away
[vocalizing]
You start a conversation
You can't even finish it
You're talking a lot
But you're not saying anything
When I have nothing to say
My lips are sealed
Say something once, why say it again?
Psycho killer, qu'est-ce que c'est?
Fa-fa-fa-fa
Fa-fa-fa-fa-fa, far better
Run, run, run, run, run, run, run away
Oh-ho-ho
Psycho killer, qu'est-ce que c'est?
Fa-fa-fa-fa
Fa-fa-fa-fa-fa, far better
Run, run, run, run, run, run, run away
[vocalizing]
We are vain and we are blind
I hate people when they're not polite
Psycho killer, qu'est-ce que c'est?
Fa-fa-fa-fa
Fa-fa-fa-fa-fa, far better
Run, run, run, run, run, run, run away
[vocalizing]